Caffè Americano (Italian pronunciation: [kafˈfɛ ameriˈkaːno]) or Americano (shortened from Italian: caffè americano or American Spanish: café americano, literally American coffee) is a style of coffee prepared by brewing espresso with added hot water, giving it a similar strength to, but different flavor from, drip coffee. The strength of an Americano varies with the number of shots of espresso and the amount of water added. The name is also spelled with varying capitalization and use of diacritics: e.g., café americano.

In Italy caffè americano could mean either espresso with hot water or filtered coffee (caffè all'americana).

Origin
The term "Americano" means "American", and comes from American Spanish, dating to the 1970s,[1] or from Italian.[2] The term "caffè Americano" specifically is Italian for "American coffee".[3] There is a popular, but unconfirmed, belief that the name has its origins in World War II when American G.I.s in Italy would dilute espresso with hot water to approximate the coffee to which they were accustomed.[4][5]

Earlier, in his 1928 novel Ashenden: Or the British Agent, Somerset Maugham has his protagonist order and drink something called an americano in Naples during World War I, but there is not enough information to indicate whether it is the same drink.[6]

Preparation
The drink consists of a single or double-shot of espresso brewed with added water. There seems to be no universal consensus on the way the water is added, but typically in the UK (and in Italy) between 1 and 16 fluid ounces (30–470ml) of hot water is added to the double espresso.[7]

Long Black is an Australasian term for an Americano (in contrast to Short Black for espresso), with an emphasis being placed on the order of preparation, adding water to the cup first before pouring the espresso on top.[8][9]

Lungo and Ristretto describe the ratio of ground coffee to espresso. Ristretto generally being a 1:1 ratio and lungo a 3:1 ratio.

The term Italiano is sometimes used in the Western United States, meaning a short Americano, specifically a 1:1 espresso/water ratio.[10]

The hot water can be drawn directly from the same espresso machine that is used to brew the espresso, or from a separate water heater or kettle. Using the same heater is convenient, particularly at home, not needing a separate heater, and the water can in fact be drawn directly into the glass, either before or after pulling the shot of espresso. Some espresso machines have a separate hot water spout for this purpose, while others allow the use of the steam wand for dispensing hot water. Using a separate water heater is more practical in a commercial setting, as it reduces the demands on the espresso machine, both not disrupting the temperature of the brew water and allowing an inexpensive water heater to be used for hot water, rather than the substantially more complicated espresso machine.


Caffè Americano is brewed coffee in the Philippines.
Uses
Most commonly, an Americano is used when one orders a brew-coffee sized drink from an espresso bar.

Americanos—particularly short, long black style Americanos—are also used within artisanal espresso preparation for beans that produce strong espresso. This is particularly used for single origin espresso, where many find that undiluted espresso shots can prove overpowering. This is particularly used of lighter coffees and roasts not generally associated with espresso, such as beans of Ethiopian or Sumatran origins. For this preparation, generally a ratio of 1:1 espresso to water is used, to prevent excess dilution, with the espresso pulled directly into a cup with existing water to minimize disruption to the crema.

Variations
The iced americano is made by combining espresso with cold water instead of hot water.
A lungo is made by extracting an espresso shot for longer giving more volume, but also extracting some bitter flavours.
A caffè crema is also made by extracting an espresso shot significantly longer than a lungo.
A red eye is made with drip coffee instead of hot water, and may be called a shot in the dark.